From 1952 to 1961, thousands of people
fled East Germany every month.
The only safe route between West Berlin
and the rest of West Germany was by air.
In 1956, 11-year-old Brigitte Jerate-Kammermeier
also used this route to flee the GDR.
This is where you taxied along on the way to freedom.
Berlin was still close to home,
but when we went to West Germany, that was a real turning point:
Getting onto the plane and leaving,
knowing that you wouldn’t be able to come back.
Berlin was divided and we felt that everywhere.
You are now leaving the British sector, the American sector,
then there was the Soviet occupation zone.
My mother was a war widow.
Somehow she managed to eke out a living,
but she didn’t get a pension,
she had great difficulty finding any sort of work.
It was life at subsistence level.
And of course she blamed the system as well and opposed it publicly,
which obviously attracted the attention of the Stasi and the police.
She also helped other people to flee
and that didn’t go unnoticed in our little town.
She started to be considered a flight risk herself
and they took away her ID card.
In 1956 she decided she had to leave,
to offer a better future to her children
and also because she did feel that her life and liberty were threatened.
The great difficulty was leaving the GDR when you had no ID.
You couldn’t pass the border at the urban railway station at Friedrichstrasse.
Since my mother no longer had her ID,
she procured an ID card from some other woman.
We entered the train separately.
My brother and I sat apart, my mother sat behind us.
Then came the last check before West Berlin.
The People’s Police went through the carriages,
looked at the passengers and asked some for ID.
This last check was the absolutely crucial moment.
When the policemen had left,
the doors had closed and the train had started to move,
then the next stop was West Berlin.
And all those who were fleeing were safe.
A policeman came, looked at my brother and said:
“You were on the train this morning already,
what are you doing here?”
It was suspicious to go back and forth on the same morning.
My brother had the presence of mind to say:
“My mother is in Brandenburg,
I had to bring her something.”
The policeman just said: “Step outside.”
My brother had to get out with him.
And the doors closed,
the train left and the next stop was the West.
It was such a terrible moment –
we were in the West, my brother was in the East.
They questioned him for hours,
but my brother stuck to his story.
I don’t know where he took that stubbornness.
He said: “My mother is in Brandenburg,
I had to bring her her slippers, her sewing, her apron,
what would a 15-year-old do with that kind of stuff?”
A young policeman said:
“Let’s just let him go, he’s just a boy.”
The other one said: “Alright, beat it,
but don’t let us catch you on this train line again.”
My brother left and got onto the next train to the West.
We were standing on the platform and he got out,
there he was.
It was an incredible moment.
We were in the West, we were free and safe,
all three of us were together.
My mother could never have left my brother behind
but she probably would have gone to jail for several years
for fleeing the GDR.
Then we came to Marienfelde,
the refugee transit camp.
That was the first shock for me.
There was a room with iron beds, rough grey blankets,
a table with three chairs and nothing else.
I felt terrible that we had to sleep there.
My mother felt the same,
she looked at the stained blankets and said:
“My God, I can’t sleep in those.”
The worst was in Neuss, where we were in a big hall
that was only subdivided by 2-metre-high plywood walls.
You could hear everything.
At that time I just wanted to go home.
But home no longer existed.
This break of just leaving without saying goodbye,
knowing my seat in the classroom would be empty the next day,
being torn away so brutally
has been a lifelong process.
When I later thought back to Berlin and my old home,
“Tempelhof” to me was always the airport through which we flew to freedom.
When it was due to be closed
and there was all the talk about what to do with it
it did make me a bit melancholic
to think that our airport no longer existed.
Tempelhof always had a certain fascination.
When I see this field now, I think:
This is wonderful, it’s green, it’s spacious,
I hope they leave it like that.